---
layout: post
title:  "Patience - you have more time than you think"
date:   2020-05-30 13:42:51 -0300
categories: jekyll update
---
# Patience - you have more time than you think
> “Patience is bitter, but its fruit is sweet.” ― Aristotle 

I don't know about you, but I find I often want things immediately, like skills, accomplishments, recognition etc. I can't tell you why this is exactly, but I would imagine it has something to do with the way interactive technology is designed (phones and computers are incredibly fast and responsive) and also our exposure to the *entire world* via the internet. We are exposed to the best of the best - some of the **worlds most successful individuals** highlighting their greatest accomplishments. 

What we don't see, though, is the years, decades, and sometimes generations of effort and experience (and also luck and fortune) behind these achievements. It's also too easy to forget that we have an *entire life* to "figure things out" and work towards our life goals. If you really care about something, you have to be willing to accept that it takes a lot of time and effort. 

Another important aspect of patience is in regards to learning and problem solving. Often, we think we can't learn something, deeming it too difficult. For years, this is exactly what I told myself when it came to using computers. If ever an issue occured which I didn't know how to fix, my initial response was fear, defeat, and even embarrassment. Throughout my electrical engineering degree at UNB though, I had no choice but to confront confusing computer issues head-on, working through them no matter how long took. Eventually, I realised that as long as I was comfortable working *at my own pace*, I could solve many challenging technical problems. Consequently, I don't think computer competency is as much a talent (as some tech savvy folk like to make it out to be) as it is **having the patience to build up a skill over time**.

Whether it's fixing an issue with your computer or learning a new skill, taking the time (sometimes a LOT of time - years, even) to look for answers and make incremental progress pays off in the long run. Having a bit of patience can allow you to recognize that with time, you will learn and you will improve. The best part is, **patience is something we are all capable of developing**.

With that said, we all move at our own pace and we all have our own strengths and weaknesses. Be proud, celebrate your accomplishments, and make sure to look back and reflect once in a while. Too often we compare our abilities against others, instead of against our past selves. 

- [Mental Health](https://wfinck97.github.io/welcome/jekyll/update/2020/05/30/Mental-Health.html)
- [Table of Contents](https://wfinck97.github.io/welcome/jekyll/update/2020/05/30/PSS-intro.html)