---
layout: post
title:  "Mindset"
date:   2020-05-30 13:42:51 -0300
categories: jekyll update
---
# Mindset - resilience for a changing world
> "When we are no longer able to change a situation - we are challenged to change ourselves." - Viktor E. Frankl

If working on our attention is managing *what to think*, then working on our mindset is managing *how to think*. This is an important point: sometimes we don't have much control over our circumstances, but, we can control *how we react* to such circumstances.

As people get older, they become much more set in their worldview, which makes it increasingly difficult for them to change their mind. At your age, you are probably more open-minded than you ever will be again. Take advantage of this. Now, more so than any other time, you can develop *mental flexibility* which can help you adapt to whatever the future will bring.

As we have seen from the coronavirus pandemic, the world can change drastically very quickly, even when things seem to be relatively okay. It would be comforting to imagine that the world will "go back to normal and everything will be okay". But the reality is, humanity will continue to be faced with adversity and will continue to make mistakes. I think it's just human nature.

Whether it's the increasingly devastating effects of climate change (environmentally but also psychologically) or growing inequality due to advancing technologies (like life extension, genetic engineering, and brain-computer interfaces), no doubt, our generation will be faced with some complex and uncomfortable challenges. 

The easiest thing to do would be to not think about it. But, eventually, you will be forced to confront these issues. Now, while you are young and adaptable, try to recognize that your mindset (which greatly influences how you react to challenging situations) can develop and change over time. Having an open mind and a broad perspective of the future will help you stay resilient in a rapidly changing world.

- [Conclusion](https://wfinck97.github.io/welcome/jekyll/update/2020/05/30/PSS-Conclusion.html)
- [Table of Contents](https://wfinck97.github.io/welcome/jekyll/update/2020/05/30/PSS-intro.html)